The Early English Text Society, present, past and future
Anyone who reads Old and Middle English literary texts will be familiar with the mid-brown volumes of the EETS, with the symbol of Alfred's jewel embossed on the front cover. Most of the works attributed to King Alfred or to Aelfric, along with some of those by bishop Wulfstan and much anonymous prose and verse from the pre-Conquest period, are to be found within the Society's three series; all of the surviving medieval drama, most of the Middle English romances, much religious and secular prose and verse including the English works of John Gower, Thomas Hoccleve and most of Caxton's prints all find their place in the publications. Without EETS editions, study of medieval English texts would hardly be possible.

As its name states, EETS was begun as a 'club', and it retains certain features of that even now. It has no physical location, or even office, no paid staff or editors, but books in the Original Series are published in the first place to satisfy subscriptions paid by individuals or institutions. This means that there is need for a regular sequence of new editions, normally one or two per year; achieving that sequence can pose problems for the Editorial Secretary, who may have too few or too many texts ready for publication at any one time. Details on a separate sheet explain how individual (but not institutional) members can choose to take certain back volumes in place of the newly published volumes against their subscriptions. On the same sheet are given details about the very advantageous discount available to individual members on all back numbers. In 1970 a Supplementary Series was begun, a series which only appears occasionally (it currently has 24 volumes within it); some of these are new editions of texts earlier appearing in the main series. Again these volumes are available at publication and later at a substantial discount to members. All these advantages can only be obtained through the Membership Secretary (the books are sent by post); they are not available through bookshops, and such bookstores as carry EETS books have only a very limited selection of the many published.

Editors, who receive no royalties or expenses and who are only very rarely commissioned by the Society, are encouraged to approach the Editorial Secretary with a detailed proposal of the text they wish to suggest to the Society early in their work; interest may be expressed at that point, but before any text is accepted for publication the final typescript must be approved by the Council (a body of some twenty scholars), and then assigned a place in the printing schedule. The Society now has a stylesheet to guide editors in the layout and conventions acceptable within its series. No prescriptive set of editorial principles is laid down, but it is usually expected that the evidence of all relevant medieval copies of the text(s) in question will have been considered, and that the texts edited will be complete whatever their length. Editions are directed at a scholarly readership rather than a popular one; though they normally provide a glossary and notes, no translation is provided.

EETS was founded in 1864 by Frederick James Furnivall, with the help of Richard Morris, Walter Skeat, and others, to bring the mass of unprinted Early English literature within the reach of students. It was also intended to provide accurate texts from which the New (later Oxford) English Dictionary could quote; the ongoing work on the revision of that Dictionary is still heavily dependent on the Society's editions, as are the Middle English Dictionary and the Toronto Dictionary of Old English. In 1867 an Extra Series was started, intended to contain texts already printed but not in satisfactory or readily obtainable editions; this series was discontinued in 1921, and from then on all the Society's editions, apart from the handful in the Supplementary Series described above, were listed and numbered as part of the Original Series. In all the Society has now published some 475 volumes; all except for a very small number (mostly of editions superseded within the series) are available in print. The early history of the Society is only traceable in outline: no details about nineteenth-century membership are available, and the secretarial records of the early twentieth century were largely lost during the second world war. By the 1950s a very large number of the Society's editions were out of print, and finances allowed for only a very limited reprinting programme. Around 1970 an advantageous arrangement was agreed with an American reprint firm to make almost all the volumes available once more whilst maintaining the membership discounts. Though this arrangement was superseded towards the end of the twentieth century and the cost of reprinting has reverted to the Society, as a result of the effort then it has proved possible to keep the bulk of the list in print.

Many comparable societies, with different areas of interest, were founded in the nineteenth century (several of them also by Furnivall); not all have survived, and few have produced as many valuable volumes as EETS. The Society's success continues to depend very heavily on the loyalty of members, and especially on the energy and devotion of a series of scholars who have been involved with the administration of the Society - the amount of time and effort spent by those who over the years have filled the role of Editorial Secretary is immeasurable. Plans for publications for the coming years are well in hand: there are a number of important texts which should be published within the next five years. At present, notably because of the efforts of a series of Executive and Membership Secretaries, the Society's finances are in reasonable shape; but certain trends give concern to the Council. The Society's continuance is dependent on two factors: the first is obviously the supply of scholarly editions suitable to be included in its series; the second is on the maintenance of subscriptions and sales of volumes at a level which will cover the printing and distribution costs of the new and reprinted books. The normal copyright laws cover the Society's volumes. All enquiries about large scale reproduction, whether by photocopying or on the internet, should be directed to the Executive Secretary in the first instance. The Society's continued usefulness depends on its editors and on its ability to maintain its (re)printing programme - and that depends on those who traditionally have become members of the Society. We hope you will maintain your membership, and will encourage both the libraries you use and also other individuals to join. Membership conveys many benefits for you, and for the wider academic community concerned for the understanding of medieval texts.

 Amy normally hated Monday mornings, but this year was different. Kamal was in her art class and she liked Kamal. She was waiting outside the classroom when her friend Tara arrived.

“Hi Amy! Your mum sent me a text. You forgot your inhaler. Why don’t you turn your phone on?” Amy didn’t like technology. She never sent text messages and she hated Facebook too.

“Did Kamal ask you to the disco?” Tara was Amy’s best friend, and she wanted to know everything that was happening in Amy’s life. “I don’t think he likes me,” said Amy. “And I never see him alone. He’s always with Grant.” Amy and Tara didn’t like Grant.

“Do you know about their art project?” asked Amy. “It’s about graffiti, I think,” said Tara. “They’re working on it at the old house behind the factory.” “But that building is dangerous,” said Amy. “Aah, are you worried he’s going to get hurt?" Tara teased. “Shut up, Tara! Hey look, here they come!”

Kamal and Grant arrived. “Hi Kamal!” said Tara. “Are you going to the Halloween disco tomorrow?” “Yes. Hi Amy,” Kamal said, smiling. “Do you want to come and see our paintings after school?” “I’m coming too!” Tara insisted.

After school, Kamal took the girls to the old house. It was very old and very dirty too. There was rubbish everywhere. The windows were broken and the walls were damp. It was scary. Amy didn’t like it. There were paintings of zombies and skeletons on the walls. “We’re going to take photos for the school art competition,” said Kamal. Amy didn’t like it but she didn’t say anything. “Where’s Grant?” asked Tara. “Er, he’s buying more paint.” Kamal looked away quickly. Tara thought he looked suspicious. “It’s getting dark, can we go now?” said Amy. She didn’t like zombies.

Then, they heard a loud noise coming from a cupboard in the corner of the room. “What’s that?” Amy was frightened. “I didn’t hear anything,” said Kamal. Something was making strange noises. There was something inside the cupboard. “Oh no! What is it?” Amy was very frightened now. “What do you mean? There’s nothing there!” Kamal was trying not to smile. Suddenly the door opened with a bang and a zombie appeared, shouting and moving its arms. Amy screamed and covered her eyes. “Oh very funny, Grant!” said Tara looking bored. Kamal and Grant started laughing. “Ha ha, you were frightened!” said Grant. "Do you like my zombie costume?” Amy took Tara’s arm. “I can’t breathe,” she said. Kamal looked worried now. “Is she OK? It was only a joke.” “No she’s not OK, you idiot. She’s having an asthma attack and she forgot her inhaler.” Tara took out her phone. “I’m calling her dad.”

Next evening was Halloween. The girls were at the school disco. “Are you better now?” asked Tara. “I’m fine,” said Amy. “I think it was the smell of paint that started the attack.” Tara looked around. “So, where are the zombies?” “I don’t know, I don’t want to see Kamal again,” said Amy. “Come on, let’s dance!”

Amy and Tara were dancing when Grant arrived, looking worried. “Hi, someone stole my phone. Have you seen Kamal? He said he was coming here at eight o’clock. Can you phone him?” “Go away, idiot!” Tara didn’t stop dancing. Grant looked upset. “Tell him I’m looking for him,” he called as he left the disco. Tara really didn’t like Grant.

Just then, Tara’s phone rang. She looked at it. “Ha!” she said, “I don’t believe it!” “What is it?” asked Amy. “Kamal just sent a text to everyone. Listen!” Tara read out Kamal’s message.

“I’m at the house. I can’t move. Please call an ambulance. My battery is running out.”

The girls didn’t stop dancing. Lots of their friends saw Kamal’s message too, but Tara told everyone it was just a joke. They all ignored it.

The next morning, Amy’s mum and dad were listening to the radio. “Is Amy up yet?” Dad asked. “No, she’s tired,” said mum, turning the volume up on the radio.

“This morning, police are investigating the death of a sixteen-year-old boy. He died last night in a disused house on Moortown Road...”

Dad put down his newspaper. “But that’s where Amy went with her friends.”

“...They found the body early this morning. His name was Kamal Naseer...”
